---
slug: orga_retrospect
title: Organization retrospective
authors: rmabille
tags: [orga]
date: 2025-10-23T01:00
---

> report n°002 | 2025-10-23

### What has been implemented

1. A GitHub project with different views to track work to be done, work in progress, and each person's individual workload.

2. Two-week sprint periods with corresponding milestones in the GitHub project and scheduled meetings in Discord.

3. A workflow for managing pushes to the GitHub repository.

<!-- truncate -->

### What didn't work

- The GitHub project was only partially completed; only the static detection section was actually completed.

- No milestones were used on the GitHub project, and some meetings didn't take place. Furthermore, because the GitHub project wasn't completed, no quantifiable progress could be made during the meetings.

- The GitHub workflow was not respected, and a push to main occurred (the workflow should have looked like: feature -> dev -> main).

### Reasons identified

- Poor task creation methodology, due to the technical nature of the project, many gray areas prevented the creation of 100% of tasks from day 1. Trying to define everything in advance led us to lose track, and progressive tasks weren't established.

- Some automatically scheduled meetings fell during review periods. Since the project wasn't clearly divided into tasks, the sprint concept couldn't be leveraged.

- No safeguards were implemented on the main branch to prevent this type of error.

### Solutions

- Schedule a working session to redefine the project into progressive tasks, which could include:
- Research and report on a particular technology
- Create a POC on a feature and then create documentation and GitHub issues for the rest of the project
- Create technical documentation (architecture diagram, flowchart, etc.) to then define new issues

- Adapt the length of our sprints to our schedules, longer if they are during review periods, for example. Also, at the end of each meeting, clearly set the objectives for the next sprint and support them with concrete actions (assigning a GitHub issue). Creating a report after each meeting to record the retrospectives conducted.

- Implementing protection for the main branch and rewriting the Git workflow more comprehensively.